The biological sciences have come to rely on scientific software for the
analysis of large datasets from high throughput sequencing experiments, thus
birthing the fields of computational biology and bioinformatics.
The reproducibility and replicability of data-intensive studies
depend on the quality of the software used.
If bioinformaticians wish to enable reproducible and replicable science, they
must follow best practices in scientific software engineering such as version
control, modular and reusable design, automated testing, and documentation.
Here we describe a framework for the development of reproducible bioinformatics
workflows that meet essential criteria for high-quality scientific software.
We implement this framework as an integrated toolchain consisting of a
pipeline repository, a Python package defining helper functions
for executing the pipeline, and reusable continuous
integration workflows.

The central component of the framework is a template repository containing a
software pipeline for the analysis of biological data.
The template is used to create new pipeline repositories, so that all of our
pipelines follow the same standardized structure and implement the practices
described here.
The pipeline can be implemented in Nextflow, Snakemake, or other workflow
management language; in practice we predominantly use Nextflow for new analysis
pipelines.
Every process or step of the pipeline points to a container to define
dependencies and ensure exact software versions are used, with custom Docker
recipes stored in a central repository for re-use across pipelines.
Alongside the pipeline, a custom Python-based command-line interface (CLI) provides
user-friendly commands for initializing projects and launching the pipeline in
HPC environments. 
The CLI leverages functions from a shared Python package to reduce code
duplication across deployments of the template and to streamline ongoing
maintenance tasks.
Using the same CLI structure means that once a user has used one of our
pipelines, they understand the basics of using all of our pipelines, regardless
of the underlying workflow language.
The template also defines continuous integration workflows via GitHub Actions
for unit and integration testing, code formatting and quality enforcement,
deployment of the documentation to a website, and drafting releases.
Custom GitHub Actions are defined in a standalone repository for re-use in CI
workflows across our organization.

Since developing this toolchain, we have deployed our template repository to
create new Nextflow pipelines for the analysis of datasets from WGS, ChIP-seq,
single-cell RNA-seq, and CRISPR experiments, with several more pipelines in
active development.
We have also taken these principles of modular design and code re-use and
applied them to our existing Snakemake pipelines for modernization.
Adopting this toolchain has streamlined our development process by speeding up
the deployment of new features and bug fixes across our pipelines.
Most importantly, the toolchain implements a framework for reproducibility that
enables best practices including modular and reusable design, automated testing,
documentation, and public release.
All of our public pipelines are available to the NIH community on the Biowulf
HPC as part of the ccbrpipeliner module, and the source code is on GitHub for
the rest of the scientific community.
Following best practices in scientific software engineering is essential for
enabling the reproducibility and replicability of findings from computational
biology studies, and our approach aims to streamline the process for developers
and scientists alike.